.\" Wray Buntine 9/92
.TH COMMAND 1 local
.SH NAME
encsmpl \- adjust sampling information for the encoded data file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B enc 
\fIsample_args\fR \fIstem\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B encsmpl
takes an encoded example file "\fIstem\fR.enc" produced
by
.BR enc (1)
and creates a sampling record as specified by \fIsample_args\fR.
The sampling record is stored in the file "\fIstem\fR.encspl".
If no seed is specified, then 
.B encsmpl
generates a psuedo-random seed from the current time in milliseconds.
.PP
The option arguments \fIsample_args\fR can be one of:
.RS
.TP
.B S,\fIsize\fR[,\fIseed\fR]
Sample without replacement from the encoded example file.
Extract a sample of size \fIsize\fR using \fIseed\fR to initialize
the random number generator.
The training set is the sample, the test set is the remainder.
.TP
.B R,\fIsize\fR[,\fIseed\fR]
Sample with replacement from the full encoded example file.
Extract a sample of size \fIsize\fR using \fIseed\fR to initialize
the random number generator.
The training set is the sample, the test set is the remainder,
any item not sampled.
.TP
.B L,\fIsize\fR[,\fIseed\fR]
Like R but the test set is taken to be the full encoded example file.
.TP
.B C,\fIparts,part\fR[,\fIseed\fR]
Used for cross validation.
Split the full encoded example file into \fIparts\fR
mutually exclusive and exhaustive partitions.
Take the \fIpart\fR-th one as the test set and the others as the
training set.
\fIseed\fR initializes the random number generator.
.TP
.B D,\fIsize,parts,part\fR[,\fIseed\fR]
Like C but first take a subsample of size \fIsize\fR and
partition that.
.TP
.B N
No sampling, use the entire file for both testing and training.
This is the initial encoded value.
Use to reset the file.
.TP
.B P
Leave the sampling as it was.
Useful in conjunction with the \-v and \-c or \-g options.
.RE
.PP
Both
.B tgen
or
.B tclass 
automatically look for sampling records to match the
"\fIstem\fR.enc" file.
If none is found, then take the full sample (the N option above).
Both 
.B tgen
and
.B tclass 
extract the training and test samples respectively.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c
Print out the test set on completion.
Used primarily to check operation.
.TP
.B \-g
Print out the training set on completion.
Used primarily to check operation.
.TP
.B \-s
If
.B encsmpl
generates a seed, print it out.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose option.  Print details of sampling taken.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
.IR enc (1).
