.\" Wray Buntine 9/91
.TH COMMAND 1 local
.SH NAME
lstat \- compute simple statistics on lines of data
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lstat 
[\fBoptions\fR] \fIfiles\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B lstat
computes simple statistics on columns in files,
such as column means, standard deviations,
t-tests or F-tests and paired t-tests on
a pair of columns.
If the first filename is "-" then stdin is used.
The first column is counted from 1.
Columns are selected by a list of columns and column ranges.
A range 3-7 means the columns 3 to 7 inclusive.
.B lstat
is intended to be used on the ".trial" files output
by \fBttest\fR.
The -T option makes certain changes that make output 
compatible with TeX tabular mode.

Either statistics are computed for a single file,
or with the \-F option,
statistics are computed differentiating the first file
from the remainder.
When comparing columns, it is done on a line by line basis,
so the paired t-test is used.

To check output from \fBttest\fR for "hypo"
files of training set size 1000, do
.br
	lstat -v 1-3,5 hypo.trial.1000*
.br
This prints statistics for columns 1,2,3 and 5.
To do a paired t-test comparing the performance of 
"mdl" and "cart" trials
(see 
.IR ttest(1) )
do 
.br
	lstat -F -s 1,2  hypo.trial.1000mdl hypo.trial.1000cart
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-2
Use a 2-tail t-test.   Default is 1-tailed.
.TP
.B \-a \fIcol-list\fR
Print the mean of each column in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-A \fIcol,col-list\fR
Print the mean of the difference between
the \fIcol\fR-th column and each column
in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-b
Skip the leading filename and totals, so only statistics are given.
.TP
.B \-C \fIcol,col-list\fR
Print the mean, standard deviation, t-score and F-score
of the difference between
the \fIcol\fR-th column and each column in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-d
Be verbose during operation.
.TP
.B \-e
Suppress usual error reporting.
.TP
.B \-f \fIprec\fR
Floats are to be printed with \fIprec\fR decimal
places after the point, default is 4.
.TP
.B \-F
Statistics are now computed as the difference between
corresponding columns in the first file and subsequent files,
with columns are paired as before for the paired t-test.
In this mode, \-s and \-S options are identical, etc.
.TP
.B \-n \fItext\fR
In the output, precede the last field specified
with a \-s, \-v, \-V option, etc.,
with the text \fItext\fR.
.TP
.B \-p  \fIcol-list\fR
The comma-separated list of integers, \fIcol-list\fR,
specifies which columns are to be printed as percents.
.TP
.B \-q  \fIitems\fR
Only display this many items on a line of output.
.TP
.B \-s \fIcol-list\fR
Print the mean and t-score (difference from 0)
of each column in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-S \fIcol,col-list\fR
Print the mean and the t-score of the difference between
the \fIcol\fR-th column and each column in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-t \fItext\fR
Seperate fields in the output with this text.
For use with -T option.
.TP
.B \-T \fItext\fR
Make output compatible with TeX tabular mode.
Damn useful for subsequently generating tables.
\fItext\fR is printed before anything else.
If a second \-T option is used,
then its \fItext\fR is printed
right at the end.
.TP
.B \-u \fIcol-list\fR
Print the mean and the sample standard deviation of the mean
for each column in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-U \fIcol,col-list\fR
Print the mean and the sample standard deviation of the mean for the
difference between
the \fIcol\fR-th column and each column in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-v \fIcol-list\fR
Print the mean and standard deviation of each column in \fIcol-list\fR.
.TP
.B \-V \fIcol,col-list\fR
Print the mean and standard deviation of the difference between
the \fIcol\fR-th column and each column in \fIcol-list\fR.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
.IR ttest (1).
