.\" Wray Buntine 9/91
.TH COMMAND 1 local
.SH NAME
mktree \- make a decision tree and optionally prune and test it
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mktree
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIstem\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B mktree 
is a "csh"
script that runs
.B tgen
and optionally
.B tprune
and
.B tclass
on the data set with file stem
.I stem.
This assumes an attribute file "\fIstem\fR.attr" exists and a training data
file "\fIstem\fR.bld" exists
or an encoded file "\fIstem\fR.enc" exists.
.PP
Pruned trees (class probability trees)
are output to file "\fIstem\fR.tree".
The original unpruned trees (counts trees)
will be in "\fIstem\fR.treec".
Control is given other things like memory and time usage,
verbose level, nice level, timing statistics, etc.
By default, all IND subroutines and niced, and given time and memory
bounds.
.PP
A typical command sequence to run on the text version of
the "hypo" data set might be:
.RS
.sp
.br
#  run tgen on hypo.bld, tprune and tclass on hypo.tst in "cart" style
.br
mktree -e -s cart -v hypo
.RE
.sp
Alternatively, you could do sampling in mktree if you had earlier
encoded the data file (see 
.IR enc (1).)
In this case you do:
.RS
.sp
.br
#  first select a sample from hypo.enc of 500 using seed 1234
.br
encsmpl S,500,1234 hypo
.br
mktree -s cart -v hypo
.RE
.sp
Some common forms can be set up using the style option
(\-s).  Learn about these using the verbose option (\-v).
Note that arguments to be passed to \fBtgen\fR, \fBtprune\fR, and \fBtclass\fR
should be enclosed in quotes.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c \fIclopts\fR
Run 
.B tclass
on all trees with options
.I clopts,
with output to standard output.  The argument \fIclopts\fR should be
enclosed in quotes.  See 
.I tclass (1)
for
.B tclass
options.
.TP
.B \-D
Echo the shell commands issued by
.BR mktree .
This option is useful for debugging or learning how to use the system.
.TP
.B \-e
By default the encoded data file "\fIstem\fR.enc" is sampled
for training and test data.
With this option, a file "\fIstem\fR.bld" is used for training
and a file  "\fIstem\fR.tst" is used for testing by 
.BR tclass .
.TP
.B \-H \fIsampleopts\fR
Pass on this flag to both
.B tgen
and 
.BR tclass .
This allows you to sample data from the encoded file for the
run.
.TP
.B \-i \fInice\fR
Automatically nices everything 
(see the "csh" "nice" command) to this value.
Default is 10.
.TP
.B \-m \fIdatasize\fR
Never let any program use more than this memory.
Only usually a problem with the \-J option in \fBtgen\fR.
See "limit datasize" in \fBcsh\fR. 
Default is 12Mb (i.e., "-m 12m" or "-m 12000k").
.TP
.B \-n \fItname\fR
Place tree in file "\fIstem\fR.tree\fItname\fR ("\fIstem\fR.tree"
followed by \fItname\fR).
.TP
.B \-o \fIgenopts\fR
Pass argument 
.I genopts 
as options to 
.B tgen.
The argument \fIgenopts\fR should be enclosed in quotes.  See
.IR tgen (1)
for 
.B tgen
options.
Multiple use of this option simply appends the arguents.
.TP
.B \-p \fIpropts\fR
Run
.B tprune
with options \fIpropts\fR
on all trees.
The argument \fIpropts\fR should be enclosed in quotes.  See
.IR tprune (1)
for 
.B tprune
options.
.TP
.B \-s \fIstyle\fR
Set up the generation (\-o) and pruning (\-p) options
to produce trees of a particular style.
These are described in the user manual in the
section on standard option sets.
To see the style options set, use the \-v option to
display IND commands before they are run. 
The styles are:
cart, c4, id3, mml, smml, look, bayes, opt, dgraph, dgraphwan.
Subsequent use of the \-o, \-p or \-s flags overlays the style
so two styles can be combined together,
for instance Bayesian lookahead is generated by "\-s bayes \-s look".
The "look" style combines with all others except cart, c4 and id3.
.TP
.B \-t \fIcputime\fR
Never let any program use more than this many seconds.
(See "limit cputime" in "csh" )
Default is 2000 seconds (i.e. "-t 2000").
.TP
.B \-T 
Time the
.BR tgen ,
.B  tprune
and
.B tclass
commands called using the "time" command in "csh".
This automatically sets the \-v option.
Timing results are printed.
.TP
.B \-v 
Verbose option.   Prints out calls made to \fBtgen\fR, \fBtprune\fR
and \fBtclass\fR.
Use to find out what was run.
Use twice to set the verbose options recursively
in \fBtgen\fR and \fBtprune\fR.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
.IR attr (1),
.IR enc (1),
.IR tclass (1),
.IR tgen (1),
.IR tprune (1),
.IR ttest (1).
