.\" Wray Buntine 9/92
.TH COMMAND 1 local
.SH NAME
enc \- encode data file for the IND system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B enc 
[\fBacfnp\fR] \fIstem\fR
.PP
.B enc 
[\fBacfnp\fR] \fIattribute_file\fR 
[\fIexample_file_in\fR] \fIencoded_file_out\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B enc
encodes an example file in text format 
(lines of space/tab delimited fields, see 
.IR attr (1))
into IND's internal format.
The attribute file can also be checked and automatically augmented
at this stage.
.PP
The simplest way to use
.B enc
is the command line:
.br
	enc stem
.br
where \fIstem\fR is the file stem for the data.
The options allow the various levels of checking and augmenting to
be switched on.
.PP
To generate an attribute file for a new data set,
construct a basic attribute file giving names of attributes,
and their basic types, but specify all values to be '?'.
Then use the command line:
.br
        enc -accfn stem
.br

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Print an augmentented attribute file to standard output on completion.
This will incorporate new values and limits encountered in the data
and should be edited into the current attribute file.
.TP
.B \-c
Update the symbol table during the encoding to reflect
new values and limits encountered.
The user will be queried as each new potential modification
to the symbol table is encountered
as to whether the example file or symbol table is at error.
If this option appears twice in the command line
then the example file is
assumed correct and
all potential modifications to the symbol table are accepted
without query.
.TP
.B \-f
Flag all attributes as being potentially missing
values or limits,
so allow modifications to them all.
Otherwise, modifications and only allowed to specially
flagged attributes in the attribute filer,
as described in \fIattr\fR(1).
.TP
.B \-n
Don't output an encoded example file, just do the checking etc.
.TP
.B \-p
Input comes from standard input,
so \fIexample_file_in\fR is assumed not given.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
.IR attr (1).
