.TH COMMAND 1 local
.SH NAME
IND \- describes the
.B IND 
family of programs
.SH SYNOPSIS
A family of programs for building, displaying and testing tree and
graph classifiers.

.SH DESCRIPTION
.sp
.SH Overview
.PP
A common approach to supervised classification and prediction in
artificial intelligence and statistical pattern recognition
is the use of decision trees.  A tree is "grown" from
data using a recursive partitioning algorithm to create a tree
which (hopefully) has good prediction of classes on new data.
Standard algorithms are CART (by Breiman, Friedman, Olshen and Stone)
and Id3 and its successor C4 (by Quinlan).  As well as reimplementing
parts of these algorithms and offering experimental control
suites, IND also introduces Bayesian and MML methods and more
sophisticated search in growing trees and for graphs.  
.PP
IND consist of four basic kinds of routines; data manipulation
routines, tree generation routines, tree testing routines, and
tree display routines.  The data manipulation routines are used
to partition a single large data set into smaller training and
test sets.  The generation routines are used to build
classifiers.  The test routines are used to evaluate classifiers
and to classify data using a classifier.  And the display
routines are used to display classifiers in various formats.
.PP
Additional documentation can be found in compressed Postscript form
in the "IND/Doc" directory.
To print these use the command sequence
"zcat file.ps | lpr -Ppostscript-printer",
directing the outout to a Postscript printer.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR attr (1),
.IR mktree (1).
.IR ttest (1).
.IR "IND/Doc/*.ps.Z"

