.\" Wray Buntine 9/90 and 9/91
.TH COMMAND 1 local
.SH NAME
tprune \- prune a decision tree
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tprune [options] \fIattribute_file tree_file\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B tprune 
simplifies a decision tree by removing (or pruning) subtrees, and then
converts the counts in the nodes to probabilities.  
This means
.B tprune
inputs a counts tree 
(usually from "\fIstem\fR.treec")
and then outputs a class probability tree
(usually to "\fIstem\fR.tree").
The pruned tree is written to the file whose name is
derived from "\fItree_file\fR".
If \fItree_file\fR contains the substring "treec" then change
it to "tree".
Otherwise append ".p" to \fItree_file\fR.
.PP
Flexible
combinations of the different pruning algorithms are available.  Can
use depth-bounded pruning, with cost-complexity or pessimistic or
minimum errors/cost pruning.  Option trees, however, can only be pruned in
a depth-bounded (\-d) or decision manner (\-D).  
This is then followed by count to probability
conversion with or without Bayesian tree smoothing.  
Methods for counts to probability conversion are explained
with the \-A option to \fBtgen\fR.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-A
Same options as for tree prior as in \fBtgen\fR.
.TP
.B \-b
Convert counts to probabilities using Laplacian estimates, and install
leaf probabilities for Bayesian tree smoothing later by 
\fBtclass\fR.
See "\fBtprint\fR -q" on how to display leaf probabilities.
.TP
.B \-B
Like the \-b
option but picks the best pruned subtree and gives all its
leaves a leaf probability of 1.
This corresponds to doing minimum encoding
(MDL, MML) pruning or picking the maximum aposterior tree
because it prevents later tree smoothing by
\fBtclass\fR.
.TP
.B \-c \fIfactor\fR
Do cost-complexity pruning with trade-off set by \fIfactor\fR. 
See also the \-V option.
.TP
.B \-d \fIdepth\fR
Before other pruning methods, strip everything below \fIdepth\fR depth.
The root node is depth 0 so the option "\-d0" will
leave just a single leaf with no tests.
.TP
.B \-D
Prune node if all subtrees make the same decision.
Done after everything else.
This option is implicit in pessimistic pruning (\-e)
and cost complexity pruning
(\-c and \fBtgen\fR  \-C).
If used with the smoothing option \-b,
this will reduce the tree in size, shouldn't effect prediction
error much, but will possibly reduce the
accuracy of class probability estimates,
and render the standard deviation estimates meaningless.
This will also make
all leaves have a leaf probability of 1, to prevent subsequent
Bayesian smoothing by \fBtclass\fR.
See "\fBtprint\fR -q" on how to display leaf probabilities.
.TP
.B \-e 
Pessimistic pruning.
Takes account of the utilities if they exist,
to prune back to a tree with reduced cost.
.TP
.B \-f 
C4.5 pruning.
Slightly different due to approximations
of underlying statistical routines.
Takes account of the utilities if they exist,
to prune back to a tree with reduced cost.
.TP
.B \-l 
This option is only intended for use with noise-free
with the \-b option.
This makes pruned subtrees ignored during the smoothing process,
i.e. subtrees that don't have 0 errors on the training
set are not considered during smoothing.
Equivalent to setting the leaf probabilities to zero
for all internal nodes (which have some errors on the training set).
.TP
.B \-M 
Prune to minimum errors subtree,
or minimum cost if utilities are specified.
Cost or errors are calculated from the counts in the tree
left during growing.
.TP
.B \-n
Convert counts to probabilities using Laplacian estimates, and make
all leaves have a leaf probability of 1, to prevent subsequent
Bayesian smoothing by \fBtclass\fR.
.TP
.B \-o \fIoptions\fR
When tree smoothing, prune node to leaf if it has more than
\fIoptions\fR
options.  A good default value to use is 5.
Only works with option trees.
.TP
.B \-p \fIfactor\fR
Set prune factor.  The pessimistic pruning algorithm prunes a subtree
if its error is within \fIfactor\fR
standard errors of a pessimistic estimate of
the error.  The default factor (when doing pessimistic pruning without
specifying a factor) is 1.0.  Be sure to also use option \-e when
using this option.
.TP
.B \-P
Same options as for tree prior as in \fBtgen\fR.
.TP
.B \-q \fIfactor\fR
Set prune factor.  When tree smoothing (option \-b),
remove any option branches whose proportion is less than this value.
Default is 0.01.
Setting factor to value greater than 1 has the effect that
all option branches other than the best are pruned
(this is similar to the \-B
flag applied to option trees,
but the tree is still able to be smoothed afterwards).
.TP
.B \-r
Extract a single tree from the option tree probabilistically.
Rather like the \-B option, but instead of choosing the
maximum posterior tree,
it chooses a tree in proportion to its individual posterior.
Matches the \-O option in \fBtprint\fR.
.TP
.B \-v
Be verbose.
Print out details of options used in pruning.
.TP
.B \-V \fItestfile\fR
Use \fItestfile\fR to determine trade-off for cost complexity pruning.
Default standard errors is 1.0.
Preceed this option with the \-c option if you wish to set
the standard errors to something else.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.br
.IR tgen (1),
.IR tclass (1).
